In recent years, breast cancer has grown in importance. Women seem to be developing breast cancer at a considerably higher rate. If the illness is not detected at all, it has already become fatal, and in many cases, limb amputation is the only method to stop it if it is discovered too late. Therefore, a reliable indicator of this problem can aid in accurate diagnosis. This paper's major objective is to apply various machine learning classification algorithms to accurately forecast the target class and enhance it by evaluating the usefulness of specific aspects of the original Wisconsin Breast Cancer dataset (WDBC) for breast cancer diagnosis prediction. The highest performing algorithm was identified after classifiers were run on the dataset, and then useful dataset features were examined to boost performance even further. We employed the Naive Bayes, Support Vector Machine (SVM), Logistic Regression, Random Forest, CNN, RNN, FFNN algorithms in this paper. Performance metrics were employed to compare the results in this case, including accuracy, precision, recall, F-measure and ROC, AUC Curve. Among the algorithms utilised, convolutional neural network produced the best results based on the values of the performance indicators. On the same dataset, we also sought to optimise our suggested model and compare it to other cutting-edge methods given by other researchers. We utilised Explainable AI (XAI) to visualise the models. Explainable AI refers to methods and techniques in the application of artificial intelligence technology (AI) such that the results of the solution can be understood by human experts.
